<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>A New Home With Grandfather</h2>
			<p class="drop-cap">A<span class="smcap">s</span> soon as Dete had disappeared the old man went back to his bench, and there he remained seated, staring at the ground without uttering a sound, while thick curls of smoke floated upward from his pipe. Heidi, meanwhile, was enjoying herself in her new surroundings; she looked about till she found a shed, built against the hut, where the goats were kept; she peeped in, and saw it was empty. She continued her search but presently came back to where her grandfather was sitting. Seeing that he was in exactly the same position as when she left him, she went and placed herself in front of the old man and said:</p>
			<p>“I want to see what you have inside the house.”</p>
			<p>“Come then!” and the grandfather rose and went before her towards the hut.</p>
			<p>“Bring your bundle of clothes in with you,” he bid her as she was following.</p>
			<p>“I shan’t want them any more,” was her prompt answer.</p>
			<p>The old man turned and looked searchingly at the child, whose dark eyes were sparkling in delighted anticipation of what she was going to see inside. “She is certainly not wanting in intelligence,” he murmured to himself. “And why shall you not want them any more?” he asked aloud.</p>
			<p>“Because I want to go about like the goats with their thin light legs.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you can do so if you like,” said her grandfather, “but bring the things in, we must put them in the cupboard.”</p>
			<p>Heidi did as she was told. The old man now opened the door and Heidi stepped inside after him; she found herself in a good-sized room, which covered the whole ground floor of the hut. A table and a chair were the only furniture; in one corner stood the grandfather’s bed, in another was the hearth with a large kettle hanging above it; and on the further side was a large door in the wall⁠—this was the cupboard. The grandfather opened it; inside were his clothes. On a second shelf were some plates and cups and glasses, and on a higher one still, a round loaf, smoked meat, and cheese, for everything that Alm-Uncle needed for his food and clothing was kept in this cupboard. Heidi thrust in her bundle of clothes, as far back behind her grandfather’s things as possible, so that they might not easily be found again. She then looked carefully round the room, and asked, “Where am I to sleep, Grandfather?”</p>
			<p>“Wherever you like,” he answered.</p>
			<p>Heidi was delighted, and began at once to examine all the nooks and corners to find out where it would be pleasantest to sleep. In the corner near her grandfather’s bed she saw a short ladder against the wall; up she climbed and found herself in the hay-loft. There lay a large heap of fresh, sweet-smelling hay, while through a round window in the wall she could see right down the valley.</p>
			<p>“I shall sleep up here, Grandfather,” she called down to him, “it’s lovely, up here. Come up and see how lovely it is!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I know all about it,” he called up in answer.</p>
			<p>“I am getting the bed ready now,” she called down again, as she went busily to and fro at her work, “but I shall want you to bring me up a sheet; you can’t have a bed without a sheet; you want it to lie upon.”</p>
			<p>“All right,” said the grandfather, and presently he went to the cupboard, and after rummaging about inside for a few minutes he drew out a long, coarse piece of stuff, which was all he had to do duty for a sheet. He carried it up to the loft, where he found Heidi had already made quite a nice bed. She had put an extra heap of hay at one end for a pillow, and had so arranged it that, when in bed, she would be able to see comfortably out through the round window.</p>
			<p>“That is capital,” said her grandfather; “now we must put on the sheet.”</p>
			<p>They spread it over the bed, and where it was too long or too broad, Heidi quickly tucked it in under the hay. It looked as tidy and comfortable a bed as you could wish for, and Heidi stood gazing thoughtfully at her handiwork.</p>
			<p>“We have forgotten something now, Grandfather,” she said after a short silence.</p>
			<p>“What’s that?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“A coverlid; when you get into bed, you have to creep in between the sheet and the coverlid.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that’s the way, is it? But suppose I have not got a coverlid?” said the old man.</p>
			<p>“Well, never mind, Grandfather,” said Heidi in a consoling tone of voice, “I can take some more hay to put over me,” and she was turning quickly to fetch another armful from the heap, when her grandfather stopped her. “Wait a moment,” he said, and he climbed down the ladder again and went towards his bed. He returned to the loft with a large, thick sack, made of flax, which he laid tidily over the bed.</p>
			<p>“That is a splendid coverlid,” said Heidi, “and the bed looks lovely altogether! I wish it was night, so that I might get inside it at once.”</p>
			<p>“I think we had better go down and have something to eat first,” said the grandfather.</p>
			<p>While the kettle was boiling the old man held a large piece of cheese on a long iron fork over the fire, turning it round and round till it was toasted a nice golden yellow color on each side. Heidi watched all that was going on with eager curiosity. Suddenly some new idea seemed to come into her head, for she turned and ran to the cupboard, and then began going busily backwards and forwards. Presently the grandfather got up and came to the table with a jug and the cheese, and there he saw it already tidily laid with the round loaf and two plates and two knives each in its right place.</p>
			<p>“Ah, that’s right,” said the grandfather, “I am glad to see that you have some ideas of your own,” and as he spoke he laid the toasted cheese on a layer of bread, “but there is still something missing.”</p>
			<p>Heidi looked at the jug that was steaming away invitingly, and ran quickly back to the cupboard. At first she could only see a small bowl left on the shelf, but she was not long in perplexity, for a moment later she caught sight of two glasses further back, and without an instant’s loss of time she returned with these and the bowl and put them down on the table.</p>
			<p>“Good, I see you know how to set about things; but what will you do for a seat?” The grandfather himself was sitting on the only chair in the room. Heidi flew to the hearth, and dragging the three-legged stool up to the table, sat herself down upon it.</p>
			<p>The grandfather filled the bowl with milk, and pushed it in front of Heidi. Then he brought her a large slice of bread and a piece of the golden cheese, and told her to eat. Heidi lifted the bowl with both hands and drank without pause till it was empty, for the thirst of all her long, hot journey had returned upon her. Then she drew a deep breath⁠—in the eagerness of her thirst she had not stopped to breathe⁠—and put down the bowl.</p>
			<p>“Was the milk nice?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“I never drank any so good before,” answered Heidi.</p>
			<p>“Then you must have some more,” and the old man filled her bowl again to the brim and set it before the child, who was now hungrily beginning her bread, having first spread it with the cheese, which after being toasted was soft as butter. The meal being over, the grandfather went outside to put the goat-shed in order, and Heidi watched with interest while he first swept it out, and then put fresh straw for the goats to sleep upon. Then he went to the little well-shed, and there he cut some long, round sticks, and a small, round board; in this he bored some holes and stuck the sticks into them, and there, as if made by magic, was a three-legged stool just like her grandfather’s, only higher. Heidi stood and looked at it, speechless with astonishment.</p>
			<p>“What do you think that is?” asked her grandfather.</p>
			<p>“It’s my stool, I know, because it is such a high one; and it was made all of a minute,” said the child, still lost in wonder and admiration.</p>
			<p>“She understands what she sees, her eyes are in the right place,” remarked the grandfather to himself.</p>
			<p>And so the time passed happily on till evening. Then the wind began to roar louder than ever through the old fir trees; Heidi listened with delight to the sound, and it filled her heart so full of gladness that she skipped and danced round the old trees, as if some unheard of joy had come to her. The grandfather stood and watched her from the shed.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a shrill whistle was heard. Down from the heights above, the goats came springing one after another, with Peter in their midst. Heidi sprang forward with a cry of joy and rushed among the flock, greeting first one and then another of her old friends of the morning. As they neared the hut the goats stood still, and then two of their number, two beautiful, slender animals, one white and one brown, ran forward to where the grandfather was standing and began licking his hands, for he was holding a little salt which he always had ready for his goats on their return home. Peter went on down the mountain with the remainder of his flock. Heidi tenderly stroked the two goats in turn, jumping about in her glee at the pretty little animals. “Are they ours, Grandfather? Are they both ours? Are you going to put them in the shed? Will they always stay with us?”</p>
			<p>Heidi’s questions came tumbling out one after the other, so that her grandfather had only time to answer each of them with “Yes, yes.” When the goats had finished licking up the salt her grandfather told her to go and fetch her bowl and the bread.</p>
			<p>Heidi obeyed and was soon back again. The grandfather milked the white goat and filled her basin, and then breaking off a piece of bread, “Now eat your supper,” he said, “and then go up to bed. Dete left another little bundle for you with a nightgown and other small things in it, which you will find at the bottom of the cupboard if you want them. I must go and shut up the goats, so be off and sleep well.”</p>
			<p>“Good-night, Grandfather! good-night. What are their names, Grandfather, what are their names?” she called out as she ran after his retreating figure and the goats.</p>
			<p>“The white one is named Little Swan, and the brown one Little Bear,” he answered.</p>
			<p>“Good-night, Little Swan, good-night, Little Bear!” she called again at the top of her voice. Then she ate her supper and went indoors and climbed up to her bed, where she was soon lying as sweetly and soundly asleep as any young princess on her couch of silk.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
