<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Clara, The Patient Little Invalid</h2>
			<p class="drop-cap">I<span class="smcap">n</span> her home at Frankfurt, Clara, the little daughter of Mr. Sesemann, was lying on the invalid couch on which she spent her whole day, being wheeled in it from room to room.</p>
			<p>Her little face was thin and pale, and at this moment her two soft blue eyes were fixed on the clock, which seemed to her to go very slowly this day, and with a slight accent of impatience, which was very rare with her, she asked, “Isn’t it time yet, Miss Rottermeyer?”</p>
			<p>This lady was sitting very upright at a small work-table, busy with her embroidery. She wore a dome-shaped head piece which made her look very solemn and dignified. For many years past, since Clara’s mother had died, the housekeeping and the superintendence of the servants had been entrusted to Miss Rottermeyer. The father who was often away from home, left her in sole charge, with the condition only that his little daughter should have a voice in all matters, and that nothing should be done against her wish.</p>
			<p>As Clara was putting her impatient question for the second time, Dete and Heidi arrived at the front door.</p>
			<p>Tinette, the maid in dainty cap and apron, ushered them upstairs into the library. Dete remained standing politely near the door, still holding Heidi tightly by the hand, for she did not know what the child might take it into her head to do amid these new surroundings.</p>
			<p>Miss Rottermeyer rose slowly and went up to the little new companion for the daughter of the house, to see what she was like. She did not seem very pleased with her appearance. Heidi was dressed in her plain little woolen frock, and her hat was an old straw one bent out of shape. The child looked innocently out from beneath it, gazing with unconcealed astonishment at the lady’s towering head dress.</p>
			<p>“What is your name?” asked Miss Rottermeyer, after examining the child for some minutes, while Heidi in return kept her eyes steadily fixed upon the lady.</p>
			<p>“Heidi,” she answered in a clear, ringing voice.</p>
			<p>“What? what? that’s no Christian name for a child; you were not christened that. What name did they give you when you were baptized?” continued Miss Rottermeyer.</p>
			<p>“I do not remember,” replied Heidi.</p>
			<p>“What a way to answer!” said the lady, shaking her head. “Dete, is the child a simpleton or only saucy?”</p>
			<p>“If the lady will allow me, I will speak for the child, for she is very unaccustomed to strangers,” said Dete, who had given Heidi a silent poke for making such an unsuitable answer. “She is certainly not stupid nor yet saucy, she speaks exactly as she thinks. This is the first time she has ever been in a gentleman’s house and she does not know good manners; but she is very willing to learn. She was christened Adelaide, after her mother, my sister, who is now dead.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s a name that one can pronounce,” remarked Miss Rottermeyer. “But I must tell you, Dete, that I am astonished to see so young a child. I told you that I wanted a companion of the same age as the young lady of the house, one who could share her lessons, and all her other occupations. Miss Clara is now over twelve; what age is this child?”</p>
			<p>“If the lady will allow me,” began Dete again, in her usual fluent manner, “I myself had lost count of her exact age; she is certainly a little younger, but not much; I cannot say precisely, but I think she is ten, or thereabouts.”</p>
			<p>“Grandfather told me I was eight,” put in Heidi. Dete gave her another poke, but as the child had not the least idea why she did so she was not at all confused.</p>
			<p>“What⁠—only eight!” cried Miss Rottermeyer angrily. “Four years too young! Of what use is such a child! And what have you learnt? What books did you have to learn from?”</p>
			<p>“None,” said Heidi.</p>
			<p>“How? what? How then did you learn to read?” continued the lady.</p>
			<p>“I have never learnt to read, or Peter either,” Heidi informed her.</p>
			<p>“Mercy upon us! you do not know how to read! is it really so?” exclaimed Miss Rottermeyer, greatly horrified. “Is it possible⁠—not able to read? What have you learnt then?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” said Heidi with unflinching truthfulness.</p>
			<p>“Young woman,” said the lady to Dete, “this is not at all the sort of companion we want. How could you think of bringing me a child like this?”</p>
			<p>But Dete was not to be put down so easily, and answered warmly, “If you will allow me, the child is exactly what I thought you required; she is unlike all other children, and I thought this child seemed as if made for the place. But I must go now, for my mistress will be waiting for me; if you will permit I will come again soon and see how she is getting on.” And with a bow Dete quickly left the room and ran downstairs. Miss Rottermeyer stood for a moment taken aback and then ran after Dete. But she had disappeared out the front door.</p>
			<p>Heidi remained where she had been standing since she first came in. Clara had looked on during the interview without speaking; now she beckoned to Heidi and said, “Come here!”</p>
			<p>Heidi went up to her.</p>
			<p>“Would you rather be called Heidi or Adelaide?” asked Clara.</p>
			<p>“I am never called anything but Heidi,” was the child’s prompt answer.</p>
			<p>“Then I shall always call you by that name,” said Clara, “it suits you. I have never heard it before, but neither have I ever seen a child like you before. Have you always had that short curly hair?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I think so,” said Heidi.</p>
			<p>“Are you pleased to come to Frankfurt?” went on Clara.</p>
			<p>“No, but I shall go home again tomorrow and take grandmother a white loaf,” explained Heidi.</p>
			<p>“Well, you are a funny child!” exclaimed Clara. “Don’t you know you were sent for to come here and stay with me and share my lessons? They are dreadfully dull, and I think the morning will never pass away. My tutor comes every morning at about ten o’clock, and then we go on with lessons till two, and it does seem such a long time. Sometimes he takes up the book and holds it close up to his face, as if he were very short-sighted, but I know it’s only because he wants to gape, and Miss Rottermeyer takes her large handkerchief out also now and then and covers her face with it, as if she was moved by what we had been reading, but that is only because she is longing to gape too. And I myself often want to gape, but I dare not, for if Miss Rottermeyer sees me gaping she runs off at once and fetches the cod-liver oil and says I must have a dose, as I am getting weak again, and the cod-liver oil is horrible. But now it will be much more amusing, for I shall be able to lie back and listen while you learn to read.”</p>
			<p>Heidi shook her head doubtfully when she heard of learning to read.</p>
			<p>“Oh, nonsense, Heidi, of course you must learn to read, everybody must, and my tutor is very kind, and never cross, and he will explain everything to you. But mind, when he explains anything to you, you won’t be able to understand; but don’t ask any questions, or else he will go on explaining and you will understand less than ever. Later, when you have learnt more and know about things yourself, then you will begin to understand what he meant.”</p>
			<p>Miss Rottermeyer now came back into the room; she had not been able to overtake Dete, and was evidently very much put out. She walked backwards and forwards in a state of agitation between the study and the dining-room, and began scolding the butler. “Make haste, Sebastian, or we shall get no dinner today at all,” she said.</p>
			<p>Then hurrying out, she called to Tinette to see that the bed-room was prepared for the little girl who had just arrived.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Sebastian had flung open the folding doors leading into the dining-room with rather more noise than he need, for he was feeling cross, although he did not dare answer back when Miss Rottermeyer spoke to him; he went up to Clara’s chair to wheel her into the next room. Heidi stood staring at him. Seeing her eyes fixed upon him, he suddenly growled out, “Well, what is there in me to stare at like that?” which he would certainly not have done if he had been aware that Miss Rottermeyer was just then entering the room. “You look so like Peter,” answered Heidi. The housekeeper clasped her hands in horror. “Is it possible!” she stammered half-aloud, “she is now addressing the servant as if he were a friend! I never could have imagined such a child!”</p>
			<p>Sebastian wheeled the couch into the dining-room and helped Clara on to her chair. Miss Rottermeyer took the seat beside her and made a sign to Heidi to take the one opposite. Beside Heidi’s plate lay a nice white roll, and her eyes lighted up with pleasure as she saw it. When Sebastian came up to her side and handed her the dish of fish, she looked at the roll and asked, “Can I have it?” Sebastian nodded, and Heidi immediately seized the roll and put it in her pocket. Sebastian still remained standing beside Heidi; it was not his duty to speak, nor to move away until she had helped herself. Heidi looked wonderingly at him for a minute or two, and then said, “Am I to eat some of that too?” Sebastian nodded again. “Give me some then,” she said, looking calmly at her plate.</p>
			<p>“I see I shall have to teach you the first rules of behavior,” said the housekeeper with a sigh. “You must not speak to Sebastian at table, or at any other time, unless you have an order to give him, and then you are not to address him as if he was some one belonging to you. Never let me hear you speak to him in that way again! It is the same with Tinette, and for myself you are to address me as you hear others doing. Clara must herself decide what you are to call her.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Clara, of course,” put in the latter. Then followed a long list of rules as to general behavior, during the course of which Heidi’s eyes gradually closed, for she had been up before five o’clock that morning and had had a long journey. She leaned back in her chair and fell fast asleep. Miss Rottermeyer having at last come to the end of her lecture said, “Now remember what I have said, Adelaide! Have you understood it all?”</p>
			<p>“Heidi has been asleep for ever so long,” said Clara, her face rippling all over with amusement, for she had not had such an entertaining dinner for a long time.</p>
			<p>“It is really insupportable what one has to go through with this child,” exclaimed Miss Rottermeyer, in great indignation, and she rang the bell so violently that Tinette and Sebastian both came running in; but no noise was sufficient to wake Heidi, and it was with difficulty that they roused her sufficiently to get her to her bed-room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
