<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>A New Home For The Winter</h2>
			<p>Alm-Uncle had kept his word and was not spending the winter in his old home. As soon as the first snow began to fall, he had shut up the hut and the outside buildings and gone down to Doerfli with Heidi and the goats. Near the church was a straggling half-ruined building, which had once been the home of a distinguished soldier. It was rented to poor people, who paid but a small sum, and when any part of the building fell it was allowed to remain. As soon as the grandfather had made up his mind to spend the winter in Doerfli, he rented the old place and worked during the autumn to get it sound and tight. In the middle of October he and Heidi took up their residence there.</p>
			<p>On approaching the house from the back one came first into an open space with a wall on either side, of which one was half in ruins. Above this rose the arch of an old window thickly overgrown with ivy, which spread over the remains of a domed roof that had evidently been part of a chapel. A large hall came next, which lay open, without doors, to the square outside. Here also walls and roof only partially remained, and indeed what was left of the roof looked as if it might fall at any minute had it not been for two stout pillars that supported it. Alm-Uncle had here put up a wooden partition and covered the floor with straw, for this was to be the goats’ house. Endless passages led from this, through the rents of which the sky as well as the fields and the road outside could be seen at intervals; but at last one came to a stout oak door that led into a room that still stood intact. Here the walls and the dark wainscoting remained as good as ever, and in the corner was an immense stove reaching nearly to the ceiling, on the white tiles of which were painted large pictures in blue. These represented old castles surrounded with trees, and huntsmen riding out with their hounds; or else a quiet lake scene, with broad oak trees and a man fishing. A seat ran all round the stove so that one could sit at one’s ease and study the pictures. These attracted Heidi’s attention at once, and she had no sooner arrived with her grandfather than she ran and seated herself and began to examine them. But when she had gradually worked herself round to the back, something else diverted her attention. In the large space between the stove and the wall four planks had been put together as if to make a large receptacle for apples; there were no apples, however, inside, but something Heidi had no difficulty in recognizing, for it was her very own bed, with its hay mattress and sheets, and sack for a coverlid, just as she had it up at the hut. Heidi clapped her hands for joy and exclaimed, “O Grandfather, this is my room, how nice! But where are you going to sleep?”</p>
			<p>“Your room must be near the stove or you will freeze,” he replied, “but you can come and see mine too.”</p>
			<p>Heidi got down and skipped across the large room after her grandfather, who opened a door at the farther end leading into a smaller one which was to be his bed-room. Then came another door. Heidi pushed it open and stood amazed, for here was an immense room like a kitchen, larger than anything of the kind that Heidi had seen before. There was still plenty of work for the grandfather before this room could be finished, for there were holes and cracks in the walls through which the wind whistled, and yet he had already nailed up so many new planks that it looked as if a lot of small cupboards had been set up round the room. He had, however, made the large, old door safe with many screws and nails, as a protection against the outside air, and this was very necessary, for just beyond was a mass of ruined building overgrown with tall weeds, which made a dwelling-place for innumerable beetles and lizards.</p>
			<p>Heidi was very delighted with her new home, and by the morning after their arrival she knew every nook and corner so thoroughly that she could take Peter over it and show him all that was to be seen; indeed she would not let him go till he had examined every single wonderful thing contained in it.</p>
			<p>Heidi slept soundly in her corner by the stove; but every morning when she first awoke she still thought she was on the mountain, and that she must run outside at once to see if the fir trees were so quiet because their branches were weighed down with the thick snow. She had to look about her for some minutes before she felt quite sure where she was, and a certain sensation of trouble and oppression would come over her as she grew aware that she was not at home in the hut. But then she would hear her grandfather’s voice outside, attending to the goats, and these would give one or two loud bleats, as if calling to her to make haste and go to them, and then Heidi was happy again, for she knew she was still at home, and she would jump gladly out of bed and run out to the animals as quickly as she could. On the fourth morning, as soon as she saw her grandfather, she said, “I must go up to see grandmother today; she ought not to be alone so long.”</p>
			<p>But the grandfather would not agree to this. “Neither today nor tomorrow can you go,” he said, “the mountain is covered fathom-deep in snow, and the snow is still falling; the sturdy Peter can hardly get along. A little creature like you would soon be smothered by it, and we should not be able to find you again. Wait a bit till it freezes, then you will be able to walk over the hard snow.”</p>
			<p>Heidi now went to school in Doerfli and eagerly set to work to learn all that was taught her. She hardly ever saw Peter there, for as a rule he was absent. The teacher was an easy-going man who merely remarked now and then, “Peter is not turning up today again, it seems, but there is a lot of snow up on the mountain and I daresay he cannot get along.” Peter, however, always seemed able to make his way through the snow in the evening when school was over, and he then generally paid Heidi a visit.</p>
			<p>At last, after some days, when Peter climbed out of his window one morning⁠—the door was quite blocked by the snow outside⁠—he was taken by surprise, for instead of sinking into the snow he fell on the hard ground and went sliding some way down the mountain side like a sleigh, before he could stop himself. He picked himself up and tested the hardness of the ground by stamping on it and trying with all his might to dig his heels into it, but even then he could not break off a single little splinter of ice; the Alm was frozen hard as iron. This was just what Peter had been hoping for, as he knew now that Heidi would be able to come up to see them. He quickly got back into the house, swallowed the milk which his mother had ready for him, thrust a piece of bread in his pocket, and said, “I must be off to school,” and in another minute was shooting down the mountain on his sled.</p>
			<p>He went like lightning, and when he reached Doerfli, which stood on the direct road to Mayenfeld, he made up his mind to go on further. So down he still went till he reached the level ground, where the sled came to a pause of its own accord, some little way beyond Mayenfeld. He knew it was too late to get to school now, as lessons would already have begun, and it would take him a good hour to walk back to Doerfli. So he took his time about returning, and reached Doerfli just as Heidi had got home from school and was sitting at dinner with her grandfather. Peter walked in, exclaiming as he stood still in the middle of the room, “She’s got it now.”</p>
			<p>“Got it? what?” asked the Uncle. “Your words sound quite warlike, general.”</p>
			<p>“The frost,” explained Peter.</p>
			<p>“Oh! now I can go and see grandmother!” said Heidi joyfully, for she had understood Peter’s words at once. “But why were you not at school then? You could have come down on the sled,” she added reproachfully, for it did not agree with Heidi’s ideas of good behavior to stay away when it was possible to be there.</p>
			<p>“It carried me on too far and I was too late,” Peter replied.</p>
			<p>“I call that being a deserter,” said the Uncle, “and deserters get their ears pulled, as you know.”</p>
			<p>Peter gave a tug to his cap in alarm, for there was no one of whom he stood in so much awe as Alm-Uncle.</p>
			<p>“And an army leader like yourself ought to be doubly ashamed of running away,” continued Alm-Uncle. “What would you think of your goats if one went off this way and another that, and refused to follow and do what was good for them? What would you do then?”</p>
			<p>“I should beat them,” said Peter promptly.</p>
			<p>“And if a boy behaved like these unruly goats, and he got a beating for it, what would you say then?”</p>
			<p>“Serves him right,” was the answer.</p>
			<p>“Good, then understand this: next time you let your sled carry you past the school when you ought to be inside at your lessons, come on to me afterwards and receive what you deserve.”</p>
			<p>Peter understood the drift of the old man’s questions and that he was the boy who behaved like the unruly goats, and he looked somewhat fearfully towards the corner to see if there happened to be a stick around.</p>
			<p>But now the grandfather suddenly said in a cheerful voice, “Come and sit down and have something, and afterwards Heidi shall go with you. Bring her back this evening and you will find supper waiting for you here.”</p>
			<p>This unexpected turn of conversation set Peter grinning all over with delight. He obeyed without hesitation and took his seat beside Heidi. But the child could not eat in her excitement at the thought of going to see grandmother. She ran to the cupboard and brought out the warm cloak Clara had sent her; with this on and the hood drawn over her head, she was all ready for her journey. She stood waiting beside Peter, and as soon as his last mouthful had disappeared she said, “Come along now.” As the two walked together Heidi had much to tell Peter of her two goats that had been so unhappy the first day in their new stall that they would not eat anything, but stood hanging their heads, not even rousing themselves to bleat. And when she asked her grandfather the reason of this, he told her it was the same with the goats as with her in Frankfurt, for it was the first time in their lives they had come down from the mountain. “And you don’t know what that is, Peter, unless you have felt it yourself,” added Heidi.</p>
			<p>When they reached their destination they found Brigitta sitting alone knitting, for the grandmother was not very well and had to stay in bed on account of the cold. Heidi had never before missed the old figure in her place in the corner, and she ran quickly into the next room. There lay grandmother on her little, poorly covered bed, wrapped up in her warm grey shawl.</p>
			<p>“Thank God,” she exclaimed as Heidi came running in; the poor old woman had had a secret fear at heart all through the autumn, especially if Heidi was absent for any length of time, for Peter had told her of a strange gentleman who had come from Frankfurt, and who had gone out with them and always talked to Heidi, and she had felt sure he had come to take her away again. Even when she heard he had gone off alone, she still had an idea that a messenger would be sent over from Frankfurt to take the child. Heidi went up to the side of the bed and said, “Are you very ill, Grandmother?”</p>
			<p>“No, no, child,” answered the old woman reassuringly, passing her hand lovingly over the child’s head, “it’s only the frost that has got into my bones a bit.”</p>
			<p>“Shall you be quite well then directly it turns warm again?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, God willing, or even before that, for I want to get back to my spinning; I thought perhaps I should do a little today, but tomorrow I am sure to be all right again.”</p>
			<p>Heidi noticed that the grandmother was wrapped up in her nice shawl and exclaimed: “In Frankfurt everybody puts on a shawl to go out walking; did you think it was to be worn in bed, Grandmother?”</p>
			<p>“I put it on, dear child, to keep myself from freezing, and I am so pleased with it, for my bedclothes are not very thick,” she answered.</p>
			<p>“But, Grandmother,” continued Heidi, “your bed is not right, because it goes downhill at your head instead of uphill.”</p>
			<p>“I know it, child, I can feel it,” and the grandmother put up her hand to the thin, flat pillow, which was little more than a board under her head, to make herself more comfortable; “the pillow was never very thick, and I have lain on it now for so many years that it has grown quite flat.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, if only I had asked Clara to let me take away my Frankfurt bed,” said Heidi. “I had three large pillows, one above the other, so that I could hardly sleep, and I used to slip down to try and find a flat place, and then I had to pull myself up again, because it was proper to sleep there like that. Could you sleep like that, grandmother?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes! the pillows keep one warm, and it is easier to breathe when the head is high,” answered the grandmother. “But we will not talk about that, for I have so much that other old sick people are without for which I thank God; there is the nice bread I get every day, and this warm wrap, and your visits, Heidi. Will you read me something today?”</p>
			<p>Heidi ran into the next room to get the hymn book. Then she picked out the favorite hymns one after another, for she knew them all by heart now, and was as pleased as the grandmother to hear them again after so many days.</p>
			<p>The grandmother lay with folded hands, while a smile of peace stole over the worn, troubled face, like one to whom good news has been brought.</p>
			<p>Suddenly Heidi paused. “Grandmother, are you feeling quite well again already?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, child, I have grown better while listening to you; read it to the end.”</p>
			<p>The child read on, and when she came to the last words:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
				<p>
					<span>“As the eyes grow dim, and darkness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closes round, the soul grows clearer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees the goal to which it travels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladly feels its home is nearer.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>the grandmother repeated them once or twice to herself, with a look of happy expectation on her face. And Heidi took equal pleasure in them, for the picture of the beautiful, sunny day of her return home rose before her eyes, and she exclaimed joyfully, “Grandmother, I know exactly what it is like to go home.”</p>
			<p>A little later Heidi said, “It is growing dark and I must go; I am so glad to think that you are quite well again.”</p>
			<p>She ran into the next room, and bid Peter come quickly, for it had now grown quite dark. But when they got outside they found the moon shining down on the white snow and everything as clear as in the daylight. Peter got his sled, put Heidi at the back, he himself sitting in front to guide, and down the mountain they shot like two birds darting through the air.</p>
			<p>When Heidi was lying that night on her high bed of hay she thought of the grandmother on her low pillow, and of all she had said about the light and comfort that awoke in her when she heard the hymns, and she thought: if I could read to her every day, then I should go on making her better. But she knew that it would be a week, if not two, before she would be able to go up the mountain again. This was a thought of great trouble to Heidi, and she tried hard to think of some way which would enable the grandmother to hear the words she loved every day. Suddenly an idea struck her, and she was so delighted with it that she could hardly bear to wait for morning, so eager was she to begin carrying out her plan. All at once she sat upright in her bed, for she had been so busy with her thoughts that she had forgotten to say her prayers, and she never now finished her day without saying them.</p>
			<p>When she had prayed with all her heart for herself, her grandfather and grandmother, she lay back again on the warm, soft hay and slept soundly and peacefully till the morning broke.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
